---
title: No Latin
subtitle: "Improving the UX for people with disabilities by eliminating the use of Lorem Ipsum in the design industry."

date: 2023-03-01 00:00:02
brief: I created a pioneering method to transform digital content blocks into fully accessible prototypes. Check it out at <a href="https://nolatin.com" target="_blank">nolatin.com</a>
description: If designers continue to use 'Loren Ipsum' placeholders in early design concepts, people with disabilities will continue to be excluded from early user research studies.
featured_image: nolatin-figma-01.png
accent_color: "#4C60E6"
case_study: true
gallery_images:
  - nolatin-04.png
  - nolatin-01.png
  - nolatin-02.png
  - nolatin-03.png
---

## About this project

As UX professionals, we should be committed to designing solutions as ambassadors for all users, including people with disabilities.

"No Latin" ([nolatin.com](https://nolatin.com){:target="\_blank"}) is a free web-based React app that converts blocks of content into an accessible web prototype using Accessibility best-practices.

This tool invites all designers and researchers to bringing intent into their design process by elevating the content quality early for people with disabilities.

> <h2>Industry Challenge:</h2> Most UX professionals struggle to incorporate accessibility considerations into their design process, resulting in poor experiences for users with disabilities.

{% include image.html

url="/images/projects/nolatin-04.png"

description="An illustration of a multicultural group of children, including a boy in a wheelchair, smiling for a photo celebrating those who design with Accessibility in mind."

%}

### Poor content leads to poor Accessibility

**Content** and **Accessibility** are considered an afterthought. If designers continue to use Loren Ipsum content placeholders in early design concepts, people with disabilities that rely on assistive technologies (i.e.: screen readers) will continue to be excluded from early user research studies.

> <h2> Solution </h2> Create good content from the beginning using Priority Guides with headlines and elements blocks, sorted by user needs.

### Putting intent on writing with priority guides

A good way to start focusing on content designing before the interface designing stage is using a content-first method called **priority guides**.

Simply put, a priority guide contains content and elements for a mobile screen, sorted by hierarchy from top to bottom and without layout specifications.

This approach enables UX professionals to focus on the user's priorities and needs, before jumping on interface designing.

## Creating Priority Guides

I created a [Figma Template](https://www.figma.com/community/file/1193216658324575083) to help designers craft their content faster.

{% include image.html

url="/images/projects/nolatin-figma-cover.png"

description="Figma template for creating priority guides by Marcelo Paiva"

%}

{% include image.html

url="/images/projects/nolatin-figma-05.png"

description="The template suggests designers to work their way through the problem definition, by creating a story and journey mapping as preparation for building the priority guides."

%}

{% include image.html

url="/images/projects/nolatin-figma-06.png"

description="Priority guides are simple and easy to build, it's like designing with words, but focusing on the user's expected inputs and outcomes."

%}

## From Intent Framing to Prototyping

By now, all the content needed is in place to begin building the **intent framing** (a collection of guides), which will be converted into a fully interactive and accessible HTML prototype.

The following is a step-by-step example on how we create and preview the accessible prototype for a Job Search page.

### 1) Create a page

Adding a page to host priority guides. Let's create a Job Search page:

{% include image.html

url="/images/projects/nolatin-figma-07.png"

description="Step-by-step example on how to create a page in nolatin.com showcasing the importance of always adding a title and description to a page."

%}

### 2) Add a section

Create a section that will serve as a page landmark and contain the user input elements:

{% include image.html

url="/images/projects/nolatin-figma-08.png"

description="Keyboard-only users need different ways to navigate web pages. Adding properly named and described sections enable keyboard-only users to jump direct to a portion of the page."

%}

### 3) Adding an input

Let's add an input inside the search section

{% include image.html

url="/images/projects/nolatin-figma-09.png"

description="In the illustration above, the label describes the function of the input form control, and generally appears adjacent to it. Sighted users make the connection visually, but others cannot. Adding a well-described label will ensure screen readers announce the text label when the user navigates to the input."

%}

### 4) Adding an action button

Following the text input, the user will need an action button to submit the search string.

{% include image.html

url="/images/projects/nolatin-figma-10.png"

description="One last step for the search pattern is to add an action button to submit the search and direct the user to the 'Search Results' page."

%}

### 5) Preview Accessible Prototype

Scroll to the top of the page and hit preview. A new tab window opens up with the elements just built.

{% include image.html

url="/images/projects/nolatin-figma-11.png"

description="On the top od the Prototype Page, the 'Preview' button will create the Accessible Prototype with all the web accessibility best practices built in."

%}
**No Latin will generate a web prototype with all the Accessibility best-practices built-in:**

- Detailed skip-links
- Purposeful landmarks
- Semantic headings
- Good ARIA attributes
- Image alternative text
- Visual focus appearance

I believe this method will enable UX professionals to be proactive about including people with disabilities early in the design process - this approach is known as **"shift-left."**

## Including people with disabilities in usability studies

{% include image.html

url="/images/projects/nolatin-05.png"

description="An illustration of a multicultural group of children, including a boy in a wheelchair, working through soving a problem together."

%}

I also created a user testing guidelines on how to provide proper accomodations for assistive technology users during usability studies.

As UX professionals, you are committed to designing solutions as ambassadors for all users, including people with disabilities.

This tool invites all designers and researchers to bringing intent into their design process by elevating the content quality early for people with disabilities.

## Conclusion

No Latin is a humble initiative to help UX professionals like me improving the user experience of people with disabilities.

I aim to motivate other UX professionals to **write quality content early** so they can produce accessible prototypes for usability studies that include all types of users.
